# Verible Language Server Extension

## Quick Start
The extension provides support for Verible Language Serve in Visual Studio Code.

Before enjoying the privilige of modern language server features, you need to take the following instructions.

1. Install the Verible Language Server. This is described in the `Prerequisite on your machine` section below.
2. Generate the `verible.filelist` at the root directory. You can execute the `Verible: Generate File List` command in VSCode to achive it.
3. If you add new source files into your project, you'll need to generate the `verible.filelist` again to include them.
> New to VSCode and have no idea how to execute a VSCode command? Try hitting `Ctrl+Shift+P` (for Windows) or `Command+Shift+P` (for MacOS) and type `Verible: Generate File List`, then press `Enter`.

## Features
The language server provides a couple of features from the [Verible SystemVerilog productivity suite](https://github.com/chipsalliance/verible) right in the editor.

 * **Linting**: Checks your code against a number of
   [lint rules](https://chipsalliance.github.io/verible/lint.html) and provides
   'wiggly lines' with diagnostic output and even offers auto-fixes when available.
 * **Formatting**: Offers Format Document/Selection according to the Verible
   formatting style. The 'look' can be configured if needed.
 * **Outline**: Shows the high-level structure of your modules and functions in the
   outline tree. Labelled begin/end blocks are also included.
 * **Hover**: Highlight symbols related to the one under the cursor.
 * **Go-To-Definition**: Jump to the definition of the symbol under the cursor.
 * **Go-To-References**: Jump to the references of the symbol under the cursor.
 * **AUTO**-expansion: Features known from [Emacs
   Verilog-mode](https://www.veripool.org/verilog-mode/), used for expanding
   various `/*AUTO...*/` pragmas in Verilog and SystemVerilog code. These
   expansions are available as code actions.
   * `AUTOARG` – generates a list of non-ANSI ports in a module header,
   * **[&#x1F389; New]** `AUTOINST` with `AUTO_TEMPLATE` – generates connections
     in a module instance based on the instantiated module's ports,
   * **[&#x1F389; New]** `AUTOINPUT`, `AUTOOUTPUT`, `AUTOINOUT` – declares ports
     based on connections generated by `AUTOINST`,
   * **[&#x1F389; New]** `AUTOWIRE` – declares wires based on connections
     generated by `AUTOINST`,
   * **[&#x1F389; New]** `AUTOREG` – declares regs for outputs not connected to
     any module instance.

## Prerequisite on your machine

The Verible plug-in needs the `verible-verilog-ls` executable installed
on your machine.

On Linux and Windows, the plug-in will try to download the necessary
executable (if it's not already available).

Get a binary distribution for your Operating System at
https://github.com/chipsalliance/verible/releases

Alternatively, [build Verible from source](https://github.com/chipsalliance/verible#build).

## Filing Issues
File bugs on the public [github issue tracker](https://github.com/chipsalliance/verible/issues/new/choose). Provide (sanitized) code examples if needed to illustrate an issue.
